libs/grid/src/lib/plugins/clipboard/clipboard.mdx, before:

import { Meta, Canvas, Controls } from '@storybook/addon-docs/blocks';
import { Tabs, Tab } from '../../../../../../apps/docs/.storybook/components/Tabs';
import * as ClipboardStories from './clipboard.stories';

<Meta of={ClipboardStories} />

# Clipboard Plugin

The Clipboard plugin brings familiar copy/cut/paste functionality to your grid with full keyboard shortcut support (Ctrl+C, Ctrl+X, Ctrl+V). It handles single cells, multi-cell selections, and integrates seamlessly with Excel and other spreadsheet applications via tab-delimited output.

> **Tip:** For the best experience, combine with the [SelectionPlugin](/docs/grid-plugins-selection--docs).
> Without selection, only the focused cell is copied. With selection enabled, you can copy entire rows
> or rectangular cell ranges depending on your selection mode.

## Installation

```ts
import { ClipboardPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/clipboard';
```

## Basic Usage

Just add the plugin and you're ready to go—keyboard shortcuts work automatically. Configure options like `includeHeaders` for copying column headers or `delimiter` for custom CSV formats.

<Tabs>
  <Tab label="Vanilla JS">
```ts
const grid = document.querySelector('tbw-grid');
grid.gridConfig = {
  columns: [
    { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
    { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
    { field: 'department', header: 'Department' }
  ],
  plugins: [
    new ClipboardPlugin({
      includeHeaders: true,
      quoteStrings: true, // Wrap text in quotes for CSV compatibility
    }),
  ],
};
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="React">
```tsx
import { useRef, useEffect } from 'react';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { ClipboardPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/clipboard';

function DataGrid({ data }) {
  const gridRef = useRef(null);

  useEffect(() => {
    if (gridRef.current) {
      gridRef.current.gridConfig = {
        columns: [
          { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
          { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
          { field: 'department', header: 'Department' }
        ],
        plugins: [
          new ClipboardPlugin({
            includeHeaders: true,
            quoteStrings: true,
          }),
        ],
      };
      gridRef.current.rows = data;
    }
  }, [data]);

  return <tbw-grid ref={gridRef} />;
}
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Vue">
```vue
<template>
  <tbw-grid ref="gridRef" />
</template>

<script setup>
import { ref, onMounted } from 'vue';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { ClipboardPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/clipboard';

const props = defineProps(['data']);
const gridRef = ref(null);

onMounted(() => {
  gridRef.value.gridConfig = {
    columns: [
      { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
      { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
      { field: 'department', header: 'Department' }
    ],
    plugins: [
      new ClipboardPlugin({
        includeHeaders: true,
        quoteStrings: true,
      }),
    ],
  };
  gridRef.value.rows = props.data;
});
</script>
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Angular">
```typescript
import { Component, ElementRef, viewChild, effect, CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA } from '@angular/core';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { ClipboardPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/clipboard';

@Component({
  standalone: true,
  schemas: [CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA],
  template: `<tbw-grid #grid />`
})
export class DataGridComponent {
  gridRef = viewChild<ElementRef>('grid');

  onGrid = effect(() => {
    this.gridRef()?.nativeElement.gridConfig = {
      columns: [
        { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
        { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
        { field: 'department', header: 'Department' }
      ],
      plugins: [
        new ClipboardPlugin({
          includeHeaders: true,
          quoteStrings: true,
        }),
      ],
    };
  });
}
```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Demos

### Default Clipboard

Select cells and use Ctrl+C to copy, Ctrl+V to paste.

<Canvas of={ClipboardStories.Default} withToolbar />
<Controls of={ClipboardStories.Default} />

### With Headers

Include column headers when copying.

<Canvas of={ClipboardStories.WithHeaders} withToolbar />

### Quoted Strings

Wrap text values in quotes for CSV compatibility.

<Canvas of={ClipboardStories.QuotedStrings} withToolbar />

## Configuration Options

| Option           | Type                            | Default | Description                                    |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------- | ------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| `includeHeaders` | `boolean`                       | `false` | Include column headers in copied data          |
| `delimiter`      | `string`                        | `'\t'`  | Column delimiter (tab for Excel compatibility) |
| `newline`        | `string`                        | `'\n'`  | Row delimiter                                  |
| `quoteStrings`   | `boolean`                       | `false` | Wrap string values in quotes                   |
| `processCell`    | `(value, field, row) => string` | -       | Custom cell value processor for copy           |

## Keyboard Shortcuts

| Shortcut           | Action                    |
| ------------------ | ------------------------- |
| `Ctrl+C` / `Cmd+C` | Copy selected cells       |
| `Ctrl+V` / `Cmd+V` | Paste into selected cells |
| `Ctrl+X` / `Cmd+X` | Cut selected cells        |

## Programmatic API

```ts
const plugin = grid.getPlugin(ClipboardPlugin);

// Copy selection to clipboard
await plugin.copy();

// Copy with custom options
await plugin.copy({ includeHeaders: true });

// Paste from clipboard
await plugin.paste();

// Get clipboard text without copying
const text = plugin.getSelectionAsText();
```

## Excel Compatibility

The default tab delimiter ensures copied data pastes correctly into Excel:

```ts
new ClipboardPlugin({
  delimiter: '\t', // Tab for Excel
  includeHeaders: true, // Include column names
});
```

## Styling

The clipboard plugin doesn't add visible UI elements. Selection styling is handled by the SelectionPlugin.

Commit message:

enhance: added plugin dependency manifest

libs/grid/src/lib/plugins/clipboard/clipboard.mdx, after:

import { Meta, Canvas, Controls } from '@storybook/addon-docs/blocks';
import { Tabs, Tab } from '../../../../../../apps/docs/.storybook/components/Tabs';
import * as ClipboardStories from './clipboard.stories';

<Meta of={ClipboardStories} />

# Clipboard Plugin

The Clipboard plugin brings familiar copy/cut/paste functionality to your grid with full keyboard shortcut support (Ctrl+C, Ctrl+X, Ctrl+V). It handles single cells, multi-cell selections, and integrates seamlessly with Excel and other spreadsheet applications via tab-delimited output.

> ⚠️ **Required Dependency:** This plugin requires [SelectionPlugin](/docs/grid-plugins-selection--docs) to be loaded first. Clipboard uses the selection state to determine which cells to copy.

## Installation

```ts
import { ClipboardPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/clipboard';
```

## Basic Usage

Just add the plugin and you're ready to go—keyboard shortcuts work automatically. Configure options like `includeHeaders` for copying column headers or `delimiter` for custom CSV formats.

<Tabs>
  <Tab label="Vanilla JS">
```ts
const grid = document.querySelector('tbw-grid');
grid.gridConfig = {
  columns: [
    { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
    { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
    { field: 'department', header: 'Department' }
  ],
  plugins: [
    new ClipboardPlugin({
      includeHeaders: true,
      quoteStrings: true, // Wrap text in quotes for CSV compatibility
    }),
  ],
};
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="React">
```tsx
import { useRef, useEffect } from 'react';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { ClipboardPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/clipboard';

function DataGrid({ data }) {
  const gridRef = useRef(null);

  useEffect(() => {
    if (gridRef.current) {
      gridRef.current.gridConfig = {
        columns: [
          { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
          { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
          { field: 'department', header: 'Department' }
        ],
        plugins: [
          new ClipboardPlugin({
            includeHeaders: true,
            quoteStrings: true,
          }),
        ],
      };
      gridRef.current.rows = data;
    }
  }, [data]);

  return <tbw-grid ref={gridRef} />;
}
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Vue">
```vue
<template>
  <tbw-grid ref="gridRef" />
</template>

<script setup>
import { ref, onMounted } from 'vue';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { ClipboardPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/clipboard';

const props = defineProps(['data']);
const gridRef = ref(null);

onMounted(() => {
  gridRef.value.gridConfig = {
    columns: [
      { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
      { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
      { field: 'department', header: 'Department' }
    ],
    plugins: [
      new ClipboardPlugin({
        includeHeaders: true,
        quoteStrings: true,
      }),
    ],
  };
  gridRef.value.rows = props.data;
});
</script>
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Angular">
```typescript
import { Component, ElementRef, viewChild, effect, CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA } from '@angular/core';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { ClipboardPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/clipboard';

@Component({
  standalone: true,
  schemas: [CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA],
  template: `<tbw-grid #grid />`
})
export class DataGridComponent {
  gridRef = viewChild<ElementRef>('grid');

  onGrid = effect(() => {
    this.gridRef()?.nativeElement.gridConfig = {
      columns: [
        { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
        { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
        { field: 'department', header: 'Department' }
      ],
      plugins: [
        new ClipboardPlugin({
          includeHeaders: true,
          quoteStrings: true,
        }),
      ],
    };
  });
}
```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Demos

### Default Clipboard

Select cells and use Ctrl+C to copy, Ctrl+V to paste.

<Canvas of={ClipboardStories.Default} withToolbar />
<Controls of={ClipboardStories.Default} />

### With Headers

Include column headers when copying.

<Canvas of={ClipboardStories.WithHeaders} withToolbar />

### Quoted Strings

Wrap text values in quotes for CSV compatibility.

<Canvas of={ClipboardStories.QuotedStrings} withToolbar />

## Configuration Options

| Option           | Type                            | Default | Description                                    |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------- | ------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| `includeHeaders` | `boolean`                       | `false` | Include column headers in copied data          |
| `delimiter`      | `string`                        | `'\t'`  | Column delimiter (tab for Excel compatibility) |
| `newline`        | `string`                        | `'\n'`  | Row delimiter                                  |
| `quoteStrings`   | `boolean`                       | `false` | Wrap string values in quotes                   |
| `processCell`    | `(value, field, row) => string` | -       | Custom cell value processor for copy           |

## Keyboard Shortcuts

| Shortcut           | Action                    |
| ------------------ | ------------------------- |
| `Ctrl+C` / `Cmd+C` | Copy selected cells       |
| `Ctrl+V` / `Cmd+V` | Paste into selected cells |
| `Ctrl+X` / `Cmd+X` | Cut selected cells        |

## Programmatic API

```ts
const plugin = grid.getPlugin(ClipboardPlugin);

// Copy selection to clipboard
await plugin.copy();

// Copy with custom options
await plugin.copy({ includeHeaders: true });

// Paste from clipboard
await plugin.paste();

// Get clipboard text without copying
const text = plugin.getSelectionAsText();
```

## Excel Compatibility

The default tab delimiter ensures copied data pastes correctly into Excel:

```ts
new ClipboardPlugin({
  delimiter: '\t', // Tab for Excel
  includeHeaders: true, // Include column names
});
```

## Styling

The clipboard plugin doesn't add visible UI elements. Selection styling is handled by the SelectionPlugin.
