libs/grid/docs/Theming.mdx, before:

{/* Theming.mdx */}
import { Meta } from '@storybook/addon-docs/blocks';

<Meta title="Grid/Theming" />

# Theming

The `@toolbox-web/grid` component is fully themeable via CSS custom properties (CSS variables). Customize colors, spacing, typography, and more without modifying source code.

Test the pre-built themes by clicking the theme button in the Storybook toolbar, or try the [Demo page](../?path=/docs/grid-demos--docs).

## Quick Start

Override CSS custom properties on the grid element or a parent container:

```css
tbw-grid {
  --tbw-color-bg: #1a1a2e;
  --tbw-color-fg: #eaeaea;
  --tbw-color-border: #16213e;
  --tbw-color-header-bg: #0f3460;
  --tbw-color-row-hover: #1a1a4e;
}
```

## Scaling with Font Size

All sizing uses **`em` units**, so the entire grid scales proportionally with `font-size`:

```css
/* Make the entire grid 25% larger */
tbw-grid {
  font-size: 1.25em;
}

/* Compact grid for dense data */
tbw-grid.compact {
  font-size: 0.875em;
}
```

This approach means changing one value scales all spacing, row heights, icons, and typography together.

## CSS Cascade Layers

The grid uses CSS Cascade Layers for predictable style priority:

```css
@layer tbw-base, tbw-plugins, tbw-theme;
```

| Layer | Priority | Purpose |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `tbw-base` | Lowest | Core grid styles |
| `tbw-plugins` | Medium | Plugin-specific styles |
| `tbw-theme` | Higher | Theme overrides |
| Unlayered | Highest | Your custom CSS (always wins) |

Your unlayered CSS always takes precedence, so you can override any style without `!important`.

## Available CSS Custom Properties

### Base Tokens

These foundational tokens control core sizing. Everything else derives from `em` units that scale with font size.

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-base-icon-size` | `1em` | Base icon size |
| `--tbw-base-radius` | `0.25em` | Base border radius |

### Typography

All font sizes use `em` units relative to the grid's inherited font size.

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-font-family` | `inherit` | Font family |
| `--tbw-font-size` | `1em` | Base font size |
| `--tbw-font-size-sm` | `0.9285em` | Small text (~13px at 14px base) |
| `--tbw-font-size-xs` | `0.7857em` | Extra small (~11px) |
| `--tbw-font-size-2xs` | `0.7142em` | Tiny text (~10px) |
| `--tbw-font-weight-header` | `bold` | Header font weight |

### Spacing Scale

Em-based spacing that scales with font size.

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-spacing-xs` | `0.25em` | Extra small (~4px) |
| `--tbw-spacing-sm` | `0.375em` | Small (~6px) |
| `--tbw-spacing-md` | `0.5em` | Medium (~8px) |
| `--tbw-spacing-lg` | `0.75em` | Large (~12px) |
| `--tbw-spacing-xl` | `1em` | Extra large (~16px) |

### Colors

Colors use `light-dark()` for automatic dark mode support.

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-color-bg` | `transparent` | Grid background |
| `--tbw-color-panel-bg` | `light-dark(#eee, #222)` | Panel backgrounds |
| `--tbw-color-fg` | `light-dark(#222, #eee)` | Primary text color |
| `--tbw-color-fg-muted` | `light-dark(#555, #aaa)` | Secondary text |
| `--tbw-color-accent` | `#3b82f6` | Primary accent (focus, selection) |
| `--tbw-color-accent-fg` | `light-dark(#fff, #000)` | Text on accent |
| `--tbw-color-success` | `hsl(122, 39%, 40%)` | Success state |
| `--tbw-color-error` | `hsl(0, 65%, 51%)` | Error state |
| `--tbw-color-selection` | `light-dark(#fff7d6, #333)` | Row/cell selection |
| `--tbw-color-row-alt` | `var(--tbw-color-bg)` | Alternating row |
| `--tbw-color-row-hover` | `light-dark(#f0f6ff, #1c1c1c)` | Row hover |
| `--tbw-color-border` | `light-dark(#d0d0d4, #454545)` | Default border |
| `--tbw-color-border-strong` | `light-dark(#777, #adadac)` | Prominent border |
| `--tbw-color-shadow` | `rgba(0,0,0,0.1)` | Box shadows |

### Header

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-color-header-bg` | (derived) | Header background |
| `--tbw-color-header-fg` | (derived) | Header text color |
| `--tbw-header-height` | `1.875em` | Header row height (~30px) |
| `--tbw-header-text-transform` | `none` | Header text transform |
| `--tbw-header-letter-spacing` | `normal` | Header letter spacing |

### Sorting Indicators

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-sort-indicator-color` | `var(--tbw-color-fg-muted)` | Sort indicator color |
| `--tbw-sort-indicator-active-color` | `var(--tbw-color-accent)` | Active sort indicator |
| `--tbw-sort-indicator-visibility` | `visible` | Sort indicator visibility |

### Rows & Cells

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-row-height` | `1.75em` | Data row height (~28px) |
| `--tbw-cell-padding` | `0.25em 0.5em` | Cell padding |
| `--tbw-cell-padding-header` | `0.25em 0.5em` | Header cell padding |
| `--tbw-cell-white-space` | `nowrap` | Cell text wrapping |
| `--tbw-row-divider` | `1px solid ...` | Row border |

### Focus & Selection

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-focus-outline` | `2px solid accent` | Focus ring style |
| `--tbw-focus-outline-offset` | `-2px` | Focus ring offset |
| `--tbw-focus-background` | `rgba(accent, 12%)` | Focused cell background |
| `--tbw-range-border-color` | `var(--tbw-color-accent)` | Range selection border |
| `--tbw-range-selection-bg` | `rgba(accent, 12%)` | Range selection fill |

### Icons

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-icon-size` | `1em` | Standard icon size |
| `--tbw-icon-size-sm` | `0.875em` | Small icon size |
| `--tbw-checkbox-size` | `1em` | Checkbox/radio size |
| `--tbw-toggle-size` | `1.25em` | Expand/collapse toggle |

### Shell & Panels

For grids using the shell layout (title bar, tool panels, toolbar).

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-shell-header-height` | `2.75em` | Shell title bar height |
| `--tbw-tool-panel-width` | `17.5em` | Side panel width (~280px) |
| `--tbw-tool-panel-header-height` | `2.5em` | Panel header height |
| `--tbw-toolbar-button-size` | `2em` | Toolbar button size |

### Animation

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-animation-duration` | `200ms` | Animation timing |
| `--tbw-animation-easing` | `ease-out` | Animation curve |
| `--tbw-transition-duration` | `120ms` | Transition timing |
| `--tbw-animation-enabled` | `1` | Enable animations (0 to disable) |

## Pre-built Themes

Import a pre-built theme CSS file:

```typescript
import '@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-material.css';
```

| Theme | Description | Import |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Standard | Polished, balanced look for most apps | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-standard.css` |
| Material | Material Design 3 inspired with elevation | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-material.css` |
| Bootstrap | Bootstrap 5 styling with familiar colors | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-bootstrap.css` |
| Vibrant | Bold purple accents with smooth animations | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-vibrant.css` |
| Contrast | High contrast for accessibility | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-contrast.css` |
| Large | Larger fonts/spacing for accessibility | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-large.css` |

> **Tip**: Use the theme switcher in the Storybook toolbar to preview different themes!

## Creating Custom Themes

Create a CSS file with your custom properties:

```css
/* my-dark-theme.css */
tbw-grid.my-dark-theme,
.my-dark-theme tbw-grid {
  --tbw-color-bg: #1e1e1e;
  --tbw-color-fg: #d4d4d4;
  --tbw-color-border: #3c3c3c;
  --tbw-color-accent: #569cd6;
  --tbw-color-panel-bg: #252526;
  --tbw-color-row-hover: #2a2d2e;
  --tbw-color-selection: #094771;
}
```

Apply via class:

```html
<tbw-grid class="my-dark-theme"></tbw-grid>
```

## Dark Mode Support

The grid uses `light-dark()` for automatic theme support:

```css
/* Colors automatically adapt to system preference */
tbw-grid {
  color-scheme: light dark;
}
```

Or force a specific mode:

```css
/* Force dark mode */
tbw-grid {
  color-scheme: dark;
}
```

For browsers without `light-dark()` support, use media queries:

```css
@media (prefers-color-scheme: dark) {
  tbw-grid {
    --tbw-color-bg: #1e1e1e;
    --tbw-color-fg: #d4d4d4;
    --tbw-color-border: #3c3c3c;
    --tbw-color-panel-bg: #252526;
    --tbw-color-row-hover: #2a2d2e;
  }
}
```

## Plugin Styling

Each plugin exposes its own CSS custom properties for fine-grained control. See individual plugin documentation for available variables:

- [Context Menu](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-context-menu--docs#styling)
- [Filtering](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-filtering--docs#styling)
- [Selection](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-selection--docs#styling)
- [Master-Detail](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-master-detail--docs#styling)
- [Tree](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-tree--docs#styling)
- [Row Grouping](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-grouping-rows--docs#styling)
- [Column Grouping](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-grouping-columns--docs#styling)
- [Pivot](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-pivot--docs#styling)
- [Visibility](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-visibility--docs#styling)

## Responsive Theming

Adjust sizing for different screen sizes using the font-size approach:

```css
/* Compact mode for mobile */
@media (max-width: 768px) {
  tbw-grid {
    font-size: 0.875em; /* Everything scales down proportionally */
  }
}

/* Or override specific variables */
@media (max-width: 480px) {
  tbw-grid {
    --tbw-cell-padding: 0.25em 0.375em;
    --tbw-row-height: 1.5em;
  }
}
```

## Typography

Customize fonts while maintaining proportional scaling:

```css
tbw-grid {
  font-family: 'Inter', system-ui, sans-serif;
  font-size: 14px; /* Base size - everything scales from this */
}

/* Monospace for code columns */
tbw-grid [data-field='id'],
tbw-grid [data-field='code'] {
  font-family: 'JetBrains Mono', 'Consolas', monospace;
}
```

## Next Steps

- **[Introduction](../?path=/docs/grid-introduction--docs)** - Grid overview
- **[Core Features](../?path=/docs/grid-core--docs)** - Sorting, editing, keyboard navigation
- **[Plugins](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-overview--docs)** - Extend with selection, filtering

Commit message:

feat(grid): theme builder reads computed CSS values from active theme

libs/grid/docs/Theming.mdx, after:

{/* Theming.mdx */}
import { Meta } from '@storybook/addon-docs/blocks';

<Meta title="Grid/Theming" />

# Theming

The `@toolbox-web/grid` component is fully themeable via CSS custom properties (CSS variables). Customize colors, spacing, typography, and more without modifying source code.

Test the pre-built themes by clicking the theme button in the Storybook toolbar, or try the [Demo page](../?path=/docs/grid-demos--docs).

> 🎨 **Want to build your own theme visually?** Try the **[Interactive Theme Builder](../?path=/story/grid-theme-builder--builder)** to customize all CSS variables with live preview and export functionality!

## Quick Start

Override CSS custom properties on the grid element or a parent container:

```css
tbw-grid {
  --tbw-color-bg: #1a1a2e;
  --tbw-color-fg: #eaeaea;
  --tbw-color-border: #16213e;
  --tbw-color-header-bg: #0f3460;
  --tbw-color-row-hover: #1a1a4e;
}
```

## Scaling with Font Size

All sizing uses **`em` units**, so the entire grid scales proportionally with `font-size`:

```css
/* Make the entire grid 25% larger */
tbw-grid {
  font-size: 1.25em;
}

/* Compact grid for dense data */
tbw-grid.compact {
  font-size: 0.875em;
}
```

This approach means changing one value scales all spacing, row heights, icons, and typography together.

## CSS Cascade Layers

The grid uses CSS Cascade Layers for predictable style priority:

```css
@layer tbw-base, tbw-plugins, tbw-theme;
```

| Layer | Priority | Purpose |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `tbw-base` | Lowest | Core grid styles |
| `tbw-plugins` | Medium | Plugin-specific styles |
| `tbw-theme` | Higher | Theme overrides |
| Unlayered | Highest | Your custom CSS (always wins) |

Your unlayered CSS always takes precedence, so you can override any style without `!important`.

## Available CSS Custom Properties

### Base Tokens

These foundational tokens control core sizing. Everything else derives from `em` units that scale with font size.

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-base-icon-size` | `1em` | Base icon size |
| `--tbw-base-radius` | `0.25em` | Base border radius |

### Typography

All font sizes use `em` units relative to the grid's inherited font size.

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-font-family` | `inherit` | Font family |
| `--tbw-font-size` | `1em` | Base font size |
| `--tbw-font-size-sm` | `0.9285em` | Small text (~13px at 14px base) |
| `--tbw-font-size-xs` | `0.7857em` | Extra small (~11px) |
| `--tbw-font-size-2xs` | `0.7142em` | Tiny text (~10px) |
| `--tbw-font-weight-header` | `bold` | Header font weight |

### Spacing Scale

Em-based spacing that scales with font size.

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-spacing-xs` | `0.25em` | Extra small (~4px) |
| `--tbw-spacing-sm` | `0.375em` | Small (~6px) |
| `--tbw-spacing-md` | `0.5em` | Medium (~8px) |
| `--tbw-spacing-lg` | `0.75em` | Large (~12px) |
| `--tbw-spacing-xl` | `1em` | Extra large (~16px) |

### Colors

Colors use `light-dark()` for automatic dark mode support.

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-color-bg` | `transparent` | Grid background |
| `--tbw-color-panel-bg` | `light-dark(#eee, #222)` | Panel backgrounds |
| `--tbw-color-fg` | `light-dark(#222, #eee)` | Primary text color |
| `--tbw-color-fg-muted` | `light-dark(#555, #aaa)` | Secondary text |
| `--tbw-color-accent` | `#3b82f6` | Primary accent (focus, selection) |
| `--tbw-color-accent-fg` | `light-dark(#fff, #000)` | Text on accent |
| `--tbw-color-success` | `hsl(122, 39%, 40%)` | Success state |
| `--tbw-color-error` | `hsl(0, 65%, 51%)` | Error state |
| `--tbw-color-selection` | `light-dark(#fff7d6, #333)` | Row/cell selection |
| `--tbw-color-row-alt` | `var(--tbw-color-bg)` | Alternating row |
| `--tbw-color-row-hover` | `light-dark(#f0f6ff, #1c1c1c)` | Row hover |
| `--tbw-color-border` | `light-dark(#d0d0d4, #454545)` | Default border |
| `--tbw-color-border-strong` | `light-dark(#777, #adadac)` | Prominent border |
| `--tbw-color-shadow` | `rgba(0,0,0,0.1)` | Box shadows |

### Header

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-color-header-bg` | (derived) | Header background |
| `--tbw-color-header-fg` | (derived) | Header text color |
| `--tbw-header-height` | `1.875em` | Header row height (~30px) |
| `--tbw-header-text-transform` | `none` | Header text transform |
| `--tbw-header-letter-spacing` | `normal` | Header letter spacing |

### Sorting Indicators

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-sort-indicator-color` | `var(--tbw-color-fg-muted)` | Sort indicator color |
| `--tbw-sort-indicator-active-color` | `var(--tbw-color-accent)` | Active sort indicator |
| `--tbw-sort-indicator-visibility` | `visible` | Sort indicator visibility |

### Rows & Cells

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-row-height` | `1.75em` | Data row height (~28px) |
| `--tbw-cell-padding` | `0.25em 0.5em` | Cell padding |
| `--tbw-cell-padding-header` | `0.25em 0.5em` | Header cell padding |
| `--tbw-cell-white-space` | `nowrap` | Cell text wrapping |
| `--tbw-row-divider` | `1px solid ...` | Row border |

### Focus & Selection

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-focus-outline` | `2px solid accent` | Focus ring style |
| `--tbw-focus-outline-offset` | `-2px` | Focus ring offset |
| `--tbw-focus-background` | `rgba(accent, 12%)` | Focused cell background |
| `--tbw-range-border-color` | `var(--tbw-color-accent)` | Range selection border |
| `--tbw-range-selection-bg` | `rgba(accent, 12%)` | Range selection fill |

### Icons

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-icon-size` | `1em` | Standard icon size |
| `--tbw-icon-size-sm` | `0.875em` | Small icon size |
| `--tbw-checkbox-size` | `1em` | Checkbox/radio size |
| `--tbw-toggle-size` | `1.25em` | Expand/collapse toggle |

### Shell & Panels

For grids using the shell layout (title bar, tool panels, toolbar).

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-shell-header-height` | `2.75em` | Shell title bar height |
| `--tbw-tool-panel-width` | `17.5em` | Side panel width (~280px) |
| `--tbw-tool-panel-header-height` | `2.5em` | Panel header height |
| `--tbw-toolbar-button-size` | `2em` | Toolbar button size |

### Animation

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-animation-duration` | `200ms` | Animation timing |
| `--tbw-animation-easing` | `ease-out` | Animation curve |
| `--tbw-transition-duration` | `120ms` | Transition timing |
| `--tbw-animation-enabled` | `1` | Enable animations (0 to disable) |

## Pre-built Themes

Import a pre-built theme CSS file:

```typescript
import '@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-material.css';
```

| Theme | Description | Import |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Standard | Polished, balanced look for most apps | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-standard.css` |
| Material | Material Design 3 inspired with elevation | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-material.css` |
| Bootstrap | Bootstrap 5 styling with familiar colors | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-bootstrap.css` |
| Vibrant | Bold purple accents with smooth animations | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-vibrant.css` |
| Contrast | High contrast for accessibility | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-contrast.css` |
| Large | Larger fonts/spacing for accessibility | `@toolbox-web/grid/themes/dg-theme-large.css` |

> **Tip**: Use the theme switcher in the Storybook toolbar to preview different themes!

## Creating Custom Themes

Create a CSS file with your custom properties:

```css
/* my-dark-theme.css */
tbw-grid.my-dark-theme,
.my-dark-theme tbw-grid {
  --tbw-color-bg: #1e1e1e;
  --tbw-color-fg: #d4d4d4;
  --tbw-color-border: #3c3c3c;
  --tbw-color-accent: #569cd6;
  --tbw-color-panel-bg: #252526;
  --tbw-color-row-hover: #2a2d2e;
  --tbw-color-selection: #094771;
}
```

Apply via class:

```html
<tbw-grid class="my-dark-theme"></tbw-grid>
```

## Dark Mode Support

The grid uses `light-dark()` for automatic theme support:

```css
/* Colors automatically adapt to system preference */
tbw-grid {
  color-scheme: light dark;
}
```

Or force a specific mode:

```css
/* Force dark mode */
tbw-grid {
  color-scheme: dark;
}
```

For browsers without `light-dark()` support, use media queries:

```css
@media (prefers-color-scheme: dark) {
  tbw-grid {
    --tbw-color-bg: #1e1e1e;
    --tbw-color-fg: #d4d4d4;
    --tbw-color-border: #3c3c3c;
    --tbw-color-panel-bg: #252526;
    --tbw-color-row-hover: #2a2d2e;
  }
}
```

## Plugin Styling

Each plugin exposes its own CSS custom properties for fine-grained control. See individual plugin documentation for available variables:

- [Context Menu](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-context-menu--docs#styling)
- [Filtering](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-filtering--docs#styling)
- [Selection](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-selection--docs#styling)
- [Master-Detail](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-master-detail--docs#styling)
- [Tree](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-tree--docs#styling)
- [Row Grouping](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-grouping-rows--docs#styling)
- [Column Grouping](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-grouping-columns--docs#styling)
- [Pivot](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-pivot--docs#styling)
- [Visibility](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-visibility--docs#styling)

## Responsive Theming

Adjust sizing for different screen sizes using the font-size approach:

```css
/* Compact mode for mobile */
@media (max-width: 768px) {
  tbw-grid {
    font-size: 0.875em; /* Everything scales down proportionally */
  }
}

/* Or override specific variables */
@media (max-width: 480px) {
  tbw-grid {
    --tbw-cell-padding: 0.25em 0.375em;
    --tbw-row-height: 1.5em;
  }
}
```

## Typography

Customize fonts while maintaining proportional scaling:

```css
tbw-grid {
  font-family: 'Inter', system-ui, sans-serif;
  font-size: 14px; /* Base size - everything scales from this */
}

/* Monospace for code columns */
tbw-grid [data-field='id'],
tbw-grid [data-field='code'] {
  font-family: 'JetBrains Mono', 'Consolas', monospace;
}
```

## Next Steps

- **[Introduction](../?path=/docs/grid-introduction--docs)** - Grid overview
- **[Core Features](../?path=/docs/grid-core--docs)** - Sorting, editing, keyboard navigation
- **[Plugins](../?path=/docs/grid-plugins-overview--docs)** - Extend with selection, filtering
