libs/grid/src/lib/plugins/visibility/visibility.mdx, before:

import { Meta, Canvas, Controls } from '@storybook/addon-docs/blocks';
import { Tabs, Tab } from '../../../../../../apps/docs/.storybook/components/Tabs';
import * as VisibilityStories from './visibility.stories';

<Meta of={VisibilityStories} />

# Column Visibility Plugin

The Visibility plugin gives users control over which columns are displayed. Hide less important columns by default, let users toggle them via a column chooser UI, or programmatically show/hide columns based on user preferences or screen size.

## Installation

```ts
import { VisibilityPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/visibility';
```

## Basic Usage

Set `visible: false` on columns you want hidden by default. The plugin provides a UI and API for toggling column visibility at runtime.

<Tabs>
  <Tab label="Vanilla JS">
```ts
const grid = document.querySelector('tbw-grid');
grid.gridConfig = {
  columns: [
    { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
    { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
    { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
    { field: 'phone', header: 'Phone', visible: false }, // Hidden by default
    { field: 'address', header: 'Address', visible: false },
  ],
  plugins: [new VisibilityPlugin()],
};

// Toggle visibility programmatically
const plugin = grid.getPlugin(VisibilityPlugin);
plugin.showColumn('phone');
plugin.hideColumn('email');
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="React">
```tsx
import { useRef, useEffect } from 'react';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { VisibilityPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/visibility';

function ConfigurableGrid({ data }) {
  const gridRef = useRef(null);

  useEffect(() => {
    if (gridRef.current) {
      gridRef.current.gridConfig = {
        columns: [
          { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
          { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
          { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
          { field: 'phone', header: 'Phone', visible: false },
        ],
        plugins: [new VisibilityPlugin()],
      };
      gridRef.current.rows = data;
    }
  }, [data]);

  return <tbw-grid ref={gridRef} />;
}
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Vue">
```vue
<template>
  <tbw-grid ref="gridRef" />
</template>

<script setup>
import { ref, onMounted } from 'vue';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { VisibilityPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/visibility';

const props = defineProps(['data']);
const gridRef = ref(null);

onMounted(() => {
  gridRef.value.gridConfig = {
    columns: [
      { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
      { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
      { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
      { field: 'phone', header: 'Phone', visible: false },
    ],
    plugins: [new VisibilityPlugin()],
  };
  gridRef.value.rows = props.data;
});
</script>
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Angular">
```typescript
import { Component, ElementRef, viewChild, effect, CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA } from '@angular/core';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { VisibilityPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/visibility';

@Component({
  standalone: true,
  schemas: [CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA],
  template: `<tbw-grid #grid />`
})
export class ConfigurableGridComponent {
  gridRef = viewChild<ElementRef>('grid');

  onGrid = effect(() => {
    this.gridRef()?.nativeElement.gridConfig = {
      columns: [
        { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
        { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
        { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
        { field: 'phone', header: 'Phone', visible: false },
      ],
      plugins: [new VisibilityPlugin()],
    };
  });
}
```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Demos

### Default Column Chooser

<Canvas of={VisibilityStories.Default} withToolbar />
<Controls of={VisibilityStories.Default} />

### Locked Columns

<Canvas of={VisibilityStories.LockedColumns} withToolbar />

### Initially Hidden

<Canvas of={VisibilityStories.InitiallyHidden} withToolbar />

## Configuration Options

| Option         | Type      | Default | Description                           |
| -------------- | --------- | ------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `allowHideAll` | `boolean` | `false` | Allow hiding all columns (no minimum) |

## Programmatic API

```ts
const plugin = grid.getPlugin(VisibilityPlugin);

plugin.hideColumn('email');
plugin.showColumn('email');
plugin.toggleColumn('email');
plugin.showAllColumns();
const hidden = plugin.getHiddenColumns();
```

Commit message:

enhance: added plugin dependency manifest

libs/grid/src/lib/plugins/visibility/visibility.mdx, after:

import { Meta, Canvas, Controls } from '@storybook/addon-docs/blocks';
import { Tabs, Tab } from '../../../../../../apps/docs/.storybook/components/Tabs';
import * as VisibilityStories from './visibility.stories';

<Meta of={VisibilityStories} />

# Column Visibility Plugin

The Visibility plugin gives users control over which columns are displayed. Hide less important columns by default, let users toggle them via a column chooser UI, or programmatically show/hide columns based on user preferences or screen size.

> 💡 **Optional Enhancement:** When [ReorderPlugin](/docs/grid-plugins-reorder--docs) is also loaded, columns in the visibility panel become draggable for reordering.

## Installation

```ts
import { VisibilityPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/visibility';
```

## Basic Usage

Set `visible: false` on columns you want hidden by default. The plugin provides a UI and API for toggling column visibility at runtime.

<Tabs>
  <Tab label="Vanilla JS">
```ts
const grid = document.querySelector('tbw-grid');
grid.gridConfig = {
  columns: [
    { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
    { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
    { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
    { field: 'phone', header: 'Phone', visible: false }, // Hidden by default
    { field: 'address', header: 'Address', visible: false },
  ],
  plugins: [new VisibilityPlugin()],
};

// Toggle visibility programmatically
const plugin = grid.getPlugin(VisibilityPlugin);
plugin.showColumn('phone');
plugin.hideColumn('email');
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="React">
```tsx
import { useRef, useEffect } from 'react';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { VisibilityPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/visibility';

function ConfigurableGrid({ data }) {
  const gridRef = useRef(null);

  useEffect(() => {
    if (gridRef.current) {
      gridRef.current.gridConfig = {
        columns: [
          { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
          { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
          { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
          { field: 'phone', header: 'Phone', visible: false },
        ],
        plugins: [new VisibilityPlugin()],
      };
      gridRef.current.rows = data;
    }
  }, [data]);

  return <tbw-grid ref={gridRef} />;
}
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Vue">
```vue
<template>
  <tbw-grid ref="gridRef" />
</template>

<script setup>
import { ref, onMounted } from 'vue';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { VisibilityPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/visibility';

const props = defineProps(['data']);
const gridRef = ref(null);

onMounted(() => {
  gridRef.value.gridConfig = {
    columns: [
      { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
      { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
      { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
      { field: 'phone', header: 'Phone', visible: false },
    ],
    plugins: [new VisibilityPlugin()],
  };
  gridRef.value.rows = props.data;
});
</script>
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Angular">
```typescript
import { Component, ElementRef, viewChild, effect, CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA } from '@angular/core';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { VisibilityPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/visibility';

@Component({
  standalone: true,
  schemas: [CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA],
  template: `<tbw-grid #grid />`
})
export class ConfigurableGridComponent {
  gridRef = viewChild<ElementRef>('grid');

  onGrid = effect(() => {
    this.gridRef()?.nativeElement.gridConfig = {
      columns: [
        { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
        { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
        { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
        { field: 'phone', header: 'Phone', visible: false },
      ],
      plugins: [new VisibilityPlugin()],
    };
  });
}
```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Demos

### Default Column Chooser

<Canvas of={VisibilityStories.Default} withToolbar />
<Controls of={VisibilityStories.Default} />

### Locked Columns

<Canvas of={VisibilityStories.LockedColumns} withToolbar />

### Initially Hidden

<Canvas of={VisibilityStories.InitiallyHidden} withToolbar />

## Configuration Options

| Option         | Type      | Default | Description                           |
| -------------- | --------- | ------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `allowHideAll` | `boolean` | `false` | Allow hiding all columns (no minimum) |

## Programmatic API

```ts
const plugin = grid.getPlugin(VisibilityPlugin);

plugin.hideColumn('email');
plugin.showColumn('email');
plugin.toggleColumn('email');
plugin.showAllColumns();
const hidden = plugin.getHiddenColumns();
```
