libs/grid/src/lib/plugins/selection/selection.mdx, before:

import { Meta, Canvas, Controls } from '@storybook/addon-docs/blocks';
import { Tabs, Tab } from '../../../../../../apps/docs/.storybook/components/Tabs';
import * as SelectionStories from './selection.stories';

<Meta of={SelectionStories} />

# Selection Plugin

The Selection plugin adds cell, row, and range selection capabilities to the grid with full keyboard support. Whether you need simple cell highlighting or complex multi-range selections, this plugin has you covered.

## Installation

```ts
import { SelectionPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/selection';
```

## Basic Usage

<Tabs>
  <Tab label="Vanilla JS">

```ts
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { SelectionPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/selection';

const grid = document.querySelector('tbw-grid');
grid.gridConfig = {
  columns: [
    { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
    { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
    { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
  ],
  plugins: [
    new SelectionPlugin({ mode: 'row' }),
  ],
};
grid.rows = data;
```

  </Tab>
  <Tab label="React">

```tsx
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { SelectionPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/selection';
import { useEffect, useRef } from 'react';
import type { DataGridElement } from '@toolbox-web/grid';

function MyGrid({ data }) {
  const gridRef = useRef<DataGridElement>(null);

  useEffect(() => {
    if (gridRef.current) {
      gridRef.current.gridConfig = {
        columns: [
          { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
          { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
          { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
        ],
        plugins: [new SelectionPlugin({ mode: 'row' })],
      };
      gridRef.current.rows = data;
    }
  }, [data]);

  return <tbw-grid ref={gridRef} style={{ height: '400px' }} />;
}
```

  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Vue">

```vue
<template>
  <tbw-grid ref="gridRef" style="height: 400px" />
</template>

<script setup>
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { SelectionPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/selection';
import { ref, onMounted } from 'vue';

const gridRef = ref(null);
const props = defineProps(['data']);

onMounted(() => {
  gridRef.value.gridConfig = {
    columns: [
      { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
      { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
      { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
    ],
    plugins: [new SelectionPlugin({ mode: 'row' })],
  };
  gridRef.value.rows = props.data;
});
</script>
```

  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Angular">

```typescript
import { Component, CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA } from '@angular/core';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { SelectionPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/selection';
import { Grid } from '@toolbox-web/grid-angular';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-my-grid',
  imports: [Grid],
  schemas: [CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA],
  template: `
    <tbw-grid
      [rows]="rows"
      [gridConfig]="config"
      style="height: 400px; display: block;">
    </tbw-grid>
  `,
})
export class MyGridComponent {
  rows = [
    { id: 1, name: 'Alice', email: 'alice@example.com' },
    { id: 2, name: 'Bob', email: 'bob@example.com' },
  ];

  config = {
    columns: [
      { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
      { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
      { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
    ],
    plugins: [new SelectionPlugin({ mode: 'row' })],
  };
}
```

  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Demos

### Default (Cell Mode)

Click cells to select them individually. Great for spreadsheet-style interactions.

<Canvas of={SelectionStories.Default} withToolbar />
<Controls of={SelectionStories.Default} />

### Row Selection Mode

Click anywhere in a row to select the entire row. Perfect for data grids where you're working with complete records.

<Canvas of={SelectionStories.RowMode} withToolbar />

### Range Selection Mode

Click and drag or Shift+Click to select rectangular ranges. Ideal for data export or bulk operations.

<Canvas of={SelectionStories.RangeMode} withToolbar />

## Configuration Options

| Option | Type                         | Default  | Description             |
| ------ | ---------------------------- | -------- | ----------------------- |
| `mode` | `'cell' \| 'row' \| 'range'` | `'cell'` | Selection behavior mode |

## Keyboard Shortcuts

The plugin provides full keyboard support for accessibility and power users:

| Shortcut        | Action                          |
| --------------- | ------------------------------- |
| `Arrow Keys`    | Move selection                  |
| `Shift + Arrow` | Extend selection (range mode)   |
| `Ctrl + Click`  | Toggle selection (multi-select) |
| `Shift + Click` | Extend to clicked cell/row      |
| `Ctrl + A`      | Select all (range mode)         |
| `Escape`        | Clear selection                 |

## Programmatic API

You can control selection programmatically via the plugin instance:

```ts
// Get the plugin instance from the grid
const plugin = grid.getPlugin(SelectionPlugin);

// Select specific cells/rows
plugin.selectCell(rowIndex, colIndex);
plugin.selectRow(rowIndex);
plugin.selectRange({ from: { row: 0, col: 0 }, to: { row: 5, col: 3 } });

// Query current selection
const ranges = plugin.getSelectedRanges();
const selectedRows = plugin.getSelectedRows();

// Modify selection
plugin.clearSelection();
plugin.selectAll();
```

## Styling

The selection plugin supports CSS custom properties for theming. Override these on `tbw-grid` or a parent container:

### CSS Custom Properties

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-focus-background` | `rgba(accent, 12%)` | Focused row background |
| `--tbw-range-selection-bg` | `rgba(accent, 12%)` | Range selection fill |
| `--tbw-range-border-color` | `var(--tbw-color-accent)` | Range selection border |
| `--tbw-color-accent` | `#3b82f6` | Primary accent color |
| `--tbw-font-size-sm` | `0.9285em` | Selection summary text |
| `--tbw-color-fg-muted` | `#888` | Summary text color |

### Example

```css
tbw-grid {
  /* Custom selection styling */
  --tbw-range-selection-bg: rgba(76, 175, 80, 0.15);
  --tbw-range-border-color: #4caf50;
  --tbw-focus-background: rgba(76, 175, 80, 0.1);
}
```

### CSS Classes

The selection plugin uses these class names:

| Class | Element |
| --- | --- |
| `.selecting` | Grid during range drag (disables text selection) |
| `.row-focus` | Currently focused row (row mode) |
| `.cell-focus` | Currently focused cell (cell mode) |
| `.selected` | Selected cell in range |
| `.selected.top` | Top edge of selection range |
| `.selected.bottom` | Bottom edge of selection range |
| `.selected.first` | Left edge of selection range |
| `.selected.last` | Right edge of selection range |
| `.tbw-selection-summary` | Selection count in header |

Commit message:

feat(grid): add triggerOn option to SelectionPlugin (#53)
Add 'click' | 'dblclick' trigger option for cell/row selection modes.
When set to 'dblclick', single-click only focuses the cell/row while
double-click activates selection. Useful for data-entry grids where
navigation should not accidentally change selection state.

Note: Only applies to 'cell' and 'row' modes. Range mode uses drag
selection which is unaffected.

libs/grid/src/lib/plugins/selection/selection.mdx, after:

import { Meta, Canvas, Controls } from '@storybook/addon-docs/blocks';
import { Tabs, Tab } from '../../../../../../apps/docs/.storybook/components/Tabs';
import * as SelectionStories from './selection.stories';

<Meta of={SelectionStories} />

# Selection Plugin

The Selection plugin adds cell, row, and range selection capabilities to the grid with full keyboard support. Whether you need simple cell highlighting or complex multi-range selections, this plugin has you covered.

## Installation

```ts
import { SelectionPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/selection';
```

## Basic Usage

<Tabs>
  <Tab label="Vanilla JS">

```ts
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { SelectionPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/selection';

const grid = document.querySelector('tbw-grid');
grid.gridConfig = {
  columns: [
    { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
    { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
    { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
  ],
  plugins: [
    new SelectionPlugin({ mode: 'row' }),
  ],
};
grid.rows = data;
```

  </Tab>
  <Tab label="React">

```tsx
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { SelectionPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/selection';
import { useEffect, useRef } from 'react';
import type { DataGridElement } from '@toolbox-web/grid';

function MyGrid({ data }) {
  const gridRef = useRef<DataGridElement>(null);

  useEffect(() => {
    if (gridRef.current) {
      gridRef.current.gridConfig = {
        columns: [
          { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
          { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
          { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
        ],
        plugins: [new SelectionPlugin({ mode: 'row' })],
      };
      gridRef.current.rows = data;
    }
  }, [data]);

  return <tbw-grid ref={gridRef} style={{ height: '400px' }} />;
}
```

  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Vue">

```vue
<template>
  <tbw-grid ref="gridRef" style="height: 400px" />
</template>

<script setup>
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { SelectionPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/selection';
import { ref, onMounted } from 'vue';

const gridRef = ref(null);
const props = defineProps(['data']);

onMounted(() => {
  gridRef.value.gridConfig = {
    columns: [
      { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
      { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
      { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
    ],
    plugins: [new SelectionPlugin({ mode: 'row' })],
  };
  gridRef.value.rows = props.data;
});
</script>
```

  </Tab>
  <Tab label="Angular">

```typescript
import { Component, CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA } from '@angular/core';
import '@toolbox-web/grid';
import { SelectionPlugin } from '@toolbox-web/grid/plugins/selection';
import { Grid } from '@toolbox-web/grid-angular';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-my-grid',
  imports: [Grid],
  schemas: [CUSTOM_ELEMENTS_SCHEMA],
  template: `
    <tbw-grid
      [rows]="rows"
      [gridConfig]="config"
      style="height: 400px; display: block;">
    </tbw-grid>
  `,
})
export class MyGridComponent {
  rows = [
    { id: 1, name: 'Alice', email: 'alice@example.com' },
    { id: 2, name: 'Bob', email: 'bob@example.com' },
  ];

  config = {
    columns: [
      { field: 'id', header: 'ID' },
      { field: 'name', header: 'Name' },
      { field: 'email', header: 'Email' },
    ],
    plugins: [new SelectionPlugin({ mode: 'row' })],
  };
}
```

  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Demos

### Default (Cell Mode)

Click cells to select them individually. Great for spreadsheet-style interactions.

<Canvas of={SelectionStories.Default} withToolbar />
<Controls of={SelectionStories.Default} />

### Row Selection Mode

Click anywhere in a row to select the entire row. Perfect for data grids where you're working with complete records.

<Canvas of={SelectionStories.RowMode} withToolbar />

### Range Selection Mode

Click and drag or Shift+Click to select rectangular ranges. Ideal for data export or bulk operations.

<Canvas of={SelectionStories.RangeMode} withToolbar />

## Configuration Options

| Option | Type                         | Default  | Description             |
| ------ | ---------------------------- | -------- | ----------------------- |
| `mode` | `'cell' \| 'row' \| 'range'` | `'cell'` | Selection behavior mode |
| `triggerOn` | `'click' \| 'dblclick'` | `'click'` | Selection trigger type |

### Double-Click Selection Trigger

In data-entry grids where users navigate frequently, you may want single-click to only **focus** the row/cell for keyboard navigation, while **double-click** changes the selection state. This prevents accidental selection changes during navigation.

> **Note:** `triggerOn` only applies to `'cell'` and `'row'` modes. Range mode uses drag selection (mousedown → mousemove), which is unaffected by this setting.

```ts
new SelectionPlugin({
  mode: 'row',
  triggerOn: 'dblclick',  // Single-click focuses, double-click selects
})
```

| `triggerOn` | Single Click | Double Click |
|-------------|--------------|--------------|
| `'click'` (default) | Selects cell/row | No additional action |
| `'dblclick'` | Focuses only | Selects cell/row |

## Keyboard Shortcuts

The plugin provides full keyboard support for accessibility and power users:

| Shortcut        | Action                          |
| --------------- | ------------------------------- |
| `Arrow Keys`    | Move selection                  |
| `Shift + Arrow` | Extend selection (range mode)   |
| `Ctrl + Click`  | Toggle selection (multi-select) |
| `Shift + Click` | Extend to clicked cell/row      |
| `Ctrl + A`      | Select all (range mode)         |
| `Escape`        | Clear selection                 |

## Programmatic API

You can control selection programmatically via the plugin instance:

```ts
// Get the plugin instance from the grid
const plugin = grid.getPlugin(SelectionPlugin);

// Select specific cells/rows
plugin.selectCell(rowIndex, colIndex);
plugin.selectRow(rowIndex);
plugin.selectRange({ from: { row: 0, col: 0 }, to: { row: 5, col: 3 } });

// Query current selection
const ranges = plugin.getSelectedRanges();
const selectedRows = plugin.getSelectedRows();

// Modify selection
plugin.clearSelection();
plugin.selectAll();
```

## Styling

The selection plugin supports CSS custom properties for theming. Override these on `tbw-grid` or a parent container:

### CSS Custom Properties

| Property | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `--tbw-focus-background` | `rgba(accent, 12%)` | Focused row background |
| `--tbw-range-selection-bg` | `rgba(accent, 12%)` | Range selection fill |
| `--tbw-range-border-color` | `var(--tbw-color-accent)` | Range selection border |
| `--tbw-color-accent` | `#3b82f6` | Primary accent color |
| `--tbw-font-size-sm` | `0.9285em` | Selection summary text |
| `--tbw-color-fg-muted` | `#888` | Summary text color |

### Example

```css
tbw-grid {
  /* Custom selection styling */
  --tbw-range-selection-bg: rgba(76, 175, 80, 0.15);
  --tbw-range-border-color: #4caf50;
  --tbw-focus-background: rgba(76, 175, 80, 0.1);
}
```

### CSS Classes

The selection plugin uses these class names:

| Class | Element |
| --- | --- |
| `.selecting` | Grid during range drag (disables text selection) |
| `.row-focus` | Currently focused row (row mode) |
| `.cell-focus` | Currently focused cell (cell mode) |
| `.selected` | Selected cell in range |
| `.selected.top` | Top edge of selection range |
| `.selected.bottom` | Bottom edge of selection range |
| `.selected.first` | Left edge of selection range |
| `.selected.last` | Right edge of selection range |
| `.tbw-selection-summary` | Selection count in header |
